[main menu](../README.md)

# Chapter 10. Summary

There are a range of improvements that could be made to the programs we have looked at. For example, methods could be added to load mesh data from file and list structures could be created for Models and Shaders.

Efficiencies could also be considered for transferring data from CPU to GPU. Consider the following statement from the OpenGL 3.3 specification:

"Shaders can declare named uniform variables, as described in the OpenGL Shading Language Specification. Values for these uniforms are constant over a primitive, and typically they are constant across many primitives. Uniforms are program object-specific state. They retain their values once loaded, and their values are restored whenever a program object is used, as long as the program object has not been re-linked" (OpenGL Spec)[https://registry.khronos.org/OpenGL/specs/gl/glspec33.core.pdf].

This is saying that the value of a uniform in a Shader is persistent between uses of the same Shader. For example, consider that the light's values are set in the fragment shader. If the light never moves, nor switches on or off, then it is not necessary to keep setting the light's values every time the scene is rendered. A flag could be used in the main Java program so that once the uniform values for the light are set, they are not set again until the light changes. This would decrease the number of transfers of data from the CPU to the GPU, which would increase efficiency. Or, Models could be sorted by Shader use. Where a group of Models uses the same Shader, this could be set up once and then each Model could be rendered. This would save time switching between Shaders, with uniforms not needing to be reset when the same Shader is being used.

Another thing that might be considered in a larger system is to standardise the names of variables in the vertex and fragment shaders. We have done this to a certain extent, since we always use position, normal and texCoord as inputs to the vertex shader. Further consideration could also be given to standardising the names of in and out attributes and also uniforms. One other point to remember is that if a declared uniform is not used in either the vertex or fragment shader, then it is ignored. Another possible thing to consider for fragment shaders is to be able to make use of a variable number of texture maps. Again, standardisation of names can help here. Joey discusses this issue in his (tutorial on models)[https://learnopengl.com/Model-Loading/Mesh].

No doubt there are further things that could be considered to make the programs we have looked at more flexible and/or more efficient. However, we are now at a stage where fairly complex programs can be constructed. If you wish to learn more advanced OpenGL, then Joey's tutorials are a good place to start.

[main menu](../README.md)