[back](ch5.md) | [main menu](../README.md)
 
## 5.1 A maths library

The maths library is supplied as a package called gmaths. A simple way to use this is to add it as a subfolder in the folder that you are developing your programs in. The download zip file contains a test program, TestVec2.java (Program Listing 5.1). Unzipping places the gmaths package into a subfolder for the test program.

Once the gmaths folder is in your working folder, you can use it in your programs with the following import statement at the top of the relevant java file:

```java
import gmaths.*;
```

It includes classes for Vec2, Vec3 and Vec4, which are a 2D vector, a 3D vector and a 4D vector, respectively. I have also included a class called Mat4 which is a 4x4 matrix, and a class called Mat4Transform, which is used to set up matrices to translate, scale and rotate objects (there are three rotate matrices, one for each axis), as well as including methods to set up a view matrix and a perspective matrix (more on these later).

Note: the parameters for my rotate methods in Mat4Transform use angles in degrees, whereas the Java methods Math.sin(), Math.cos(), etc. require radians. Inside the rotate methods, I convert the supplied parameters into radians before use with Math.sin() and Math.cos(). Program Listing 5.1 gives an example of using the 2D vector class, Vec2, showing some of the methods available. You should examine the methods in each of the classes in the gmaths package before continuing further.

You will need to compile the package before using it. Make sure the gmaths folder is in the folder you are working in. Then, from the command line, type: javac gmaths\*.java. This will produce the package and you can now import it into your programs. (On a Mac you may have to use javac gmaths/*.java.)

To produce some java documentation for the classes in the gmaths package, type: javadoc gmaths\*.java. This will create an index.html file in the current folder. Opening this will show the documentation. I have only documented the Vec2 class and the Mat4Transform class, but this should be enough to explain how things are working.

```java
import gmaths.*;
  
public class TestVec2 {
    
  public static void main(String[] args) {
    Vec2 v1 = new Vec2();
    Vec2 v2 = new Vec2();
    System.out.println("Vec2 v1 = " + v1);
    System.out.println("Vec2 v2 = " + v2);
    
    v1.x = 1;
    v2.y = 1;
    System.out.println("v1 = " + v1);
    System.out.println("v2 = " + v2);
    
    v1.add(v2);
    System.out.println("v1.add(v2);");
    System.out.println("v1 = " + v1);
    System.out.println("v2 = " + v2);
    
    Vec2 v3 = Vec2.add(new Vec2(-1f,0), v2);
    System.out.println("v3 = v2+(-1f,0) = " + v3);
    
    float m = v3.magnitude();
    System.out.println("v3.magnitude = " + m);
    
    Vec2 v4 = Vec2.normalize(v3);
    System.out.println("v4 = normalize(v3) = " + v4);
    
    v3.normalize();
    System.out.println("v3.normalize();");
    System.out.println("v3 = " + v3);
        
    Vec2 v5 = new Vec2(3.2f,5f);
    float d = v4.dotProduct(v5);
    System.out.println("v5 = new Vec2(3.2f,5f) = " + v5);
    System.out.println("d = v4.dotProduct(v5) = " + d);
  }
}
  ```

**Program listing 5.1:** TestVec2.java

## Maths in the shaders

Before proceeding, make sure you read through Joey's tutorial on Transformations. This tutorial explains some of the types available in GLSL, in particular vec3 and mat4, which, unsurprisingly, are similar to the C functions available in glm. We'll make use of mat4 in a later GLSL program, so do read through Joey's tutorial.

Note: by Java convention, the Java classes in my gmaths library use uppercase first characters, e.g. Vec3. In GLSL, these are types and are all lower case, e.g. vec3.

---

## MCQs (written in collaboration with Google Gemini)

GLSL???

---

## Exercises

1. Something about the maths package?


[back](ch5.md) | [main menu](../README.md)